CHAPTER VII On my return, I found the following letter
from my father. My dear Victor, you have probably waited impatiently for a letter to fix the date
of your return to us, and I was at first tempted to write only a few lines, merely mentioning the
day on which I should expect you. But that would be a cruel kindness, and I dare not do it. What
would be your surprise, my son, when you expected a happy and glad welcome, to behold on the contrary
tears and wretchedness? And how, Victor, can I relate our misfortune? Absence cannot have rendered
you callous to our joys and griefs, and how shall I inflect pain on my long-absent son? I wish to
prepare you for the woeful news, but I know it is impossible. Even now your eye skims over the page
to seek the words which are to convey to you the horrible tidings. William is dead. That sweet child
whose smiles delighted and warmed my heart, who was so gentle yet so gay. Victor, he is murdered.
I will not attempt to console you, but will simply relate the circumstances of the transaction. Last
Thursday, May the 7th, I, my niece, and your two brothers went to walk in Blancpale. The evening
was warm and serene, and we prolonged our walk farther than usual. It was already dusk before
we thought of returning, and then we discovered that William and Ernest, who had gone on before,
were not to be found. We accordingly rested on a seat until they should return. Presently Ernest
came and inquired if we had seen his brother. He said that he had been playing with him,
that William had run away to hide himself, and that he vainly sought for him, and afterwards
he waited a long time, but that he did not return. This account rather alarmed us, and we continued
to search for him until night fell, when Elizabeth conjectured that he might have returned to the
house. He was not there. We returned again with torches, for I could not rest when I thought
that my sweet boy had lost himself and was exposed to all the damps and dews of night.
Elizabeth also suffered extreme anguish. About five in the morning I discovered my lovely boy,
whom the night before I had seen blooming and active in health, stretched on the grass,
livid and motionless. The print of the murderer's finger was on his neck. He was conveyed home,
and the anguish that was visible in my countenance betrayed the secret to Elizabeth. She was very
earnest to see the corpse. At first I attempted to prevent her, but she persisted, and entering
the room where it lay, hastily examined the neck of the victim, and clasping her hands,
exclaimed, Oh, God, I have murdered my darling child. She fainted and was restored with extreme
difficulty. When she again lived, it was only to weep and sigh. She told me that that same evening
William had teased her to let him wear a very valuable miniature that she possessed of your
mother. This picture is gone, and was doubtless the temptation which urged the murderer to the
deed. We have no trace of him at present, although our exertions to discover him are
remitted, but they will not restore my beloved William. Come, dearest Victor, you alone can
console Elizabeth. She weeps continually and accuses herself unjustly as the cause of his
death. Her words pierce my heart. We are all unhappy, but will not that be an additional
motive for you, my son, to return and be our comforter? Your dear mother, alas, Victor,
I now say thank God she did not live to witness the cruel, miserable death of her youngest darling.
Come, Victor, not brooding thoughts of vengeance against the assassin, but with feelings of peace
and gentleness that will heal instead of festering the wounds of our minds. Enter the house of
mourning, my friend, but with kindness and affection for those who love you, and not with
hatred for your enemies. Your affectionate and afflicted father, Alphonse Frankenstein,
Geneva, May 12th, 17 blank blank. Clairvaux, who had watched my countenance as I read this
letter, was surprised to observe the despair that succeeded the joy I had first expressed
on receiving news from my friends. I threw the letter on the table and covered my face with my
hands. My dear Frankenstein, exclaimed Henry when he perceived me weep with bitterness,
Are you always to be unhappy? My dear friend, what has happened? I motioned him to take up the
letter while I walked up and down the room in the extremist agitation. Tears also gushed from the
eyes of Clairvaux as he read the account of my misfortune. I can offer you no consolation,
my friend, said he. Your disaster is irreparable. What do you intend to do? To go instantly to
Geneva. Come with me, Henry, to order the horses. During our walk, Clairvaux endeavoured to say a
few words of consolation. He could only express his heartfelt sympathy. Poor William, said he.
Dear lovely child, he now sleeps with his angel mother, who that had seen him bright and joyous
in his young beauty, but must weep over his untimely loss. To die so miserably, to feel the
how much more a murder that could destroy radiant innocence. Poor little fellow,
one only consolation have we. His friends mourn and weep, but he is at rest. The pang is over,
his sufferings are at an end forever. A sod covers his gentle form and he knows no pain.
He can no longer be a subject for pity. We must reserve that for his miserable survivors.
Clairvaux spoke thus as we hurried through the streets. The words impressed themselves on my
mind and I remembered them afterwards in solitude. But now, as soon as the horses arrived,
I hurried into a cabriolet and bade farewell to my friend. My journey was very melancholy. At first,
I wished to hurry on, for I longed to console and sympathise with my loved and sorrowing friends,
but when I drew near my native town, I slackened my progress. I could hardly sustain the multitude
of feelings that crowded into my mind. I passed through scenes familiar to my youth, but which
I had not seen for nearly six years. How altered everything might be during that time. One sudden
and desolating change had taken place, but a thousand little circumstances might have done
by degrees worked other alterations, which, although they were done more tranquilly,
might not be the less decisive. Fear overcame me. I dared no advance, dreading a thousand nameless
evils that made me tremble, although I was unable to define them. I remained two days at Lausanne,
in this painful state of mind. I contemplated the lake. The waters were placid, all around was calm,
and the snowy mountains, the palaces of nature, were not changed. By degrees the calm and heavenly
scene restored me, and I continued my journey towards Geneva. The road ran by the side of the
lake, which became narrower as I approached my native town. I discovered more distinctly the black
sides of Jura and the bright summit of Mont Blanc. I wept like a child. Dear mountains,
my own beautiful lake, how do you welcome your wanderer? Your summits are clear, the sky and
the lake are blue and placid. Is this to prognosticate peace, or to mock at my unhappiness? I fear,
my friend, that I shall render myself tedious by dwelling on these preliminary circumstances,
but they were days of comparative happiness, and I think of them with pleasure. My country,
my beloved country, who but a native can tell the delight I took in again beholding thy
streams, thy mountains, and more than all, thy lovely lake? Yet, as I drew nearer home,
grief and fear again overcame me. Night also closed around, and when I could hardly see the
dark mountains I felt still more gloomily. The picture appeared a vast and dim scene of evil,
and I foresaw obscurely that I was destined to become the most wretched of human beings.
Alas, I prophesied truly, and failed only in one single circumstance, that in all the misery I
imagined and dreaded I did not conceive the hundredth part of the anguish I was destined
to endure. It was completely dark when I arrived in the environs of Geneva. The gates
of the town were already shut, and I was obliged to pass the night at Zecharon, a village at the
distance of Haffer League from the city. The sky was serene, and as I was unable to rest,
I resolved to visit the spot where my poor William had been murdered. As I could not
pass through the town, I was obliged to cross the lake in a boat to arrive at Plain Ballet.
During this short voyage, I saw the lightning playing on the summit of Mont Blanc in the most
beautiful figures. The storm appeared to approach rapidly, and on landing, I ascended a low hill
that I might observe its progress. It advanced, the heavens were clouded, and I soon felt the
rain coming slowly in large drops, but its violence quickly increased. I quitted my seat
and walked on, although the darkness and storm increased every minute and the thunder burst
with a terrific crash over my head. It was echoed from Salève, the Jures, and the Alps of Savoy.
Vivid flashes of lightning dazzled my eyes, illuminating the lake, making it appear like
a vast sheet of fire. Then, for an instant, everything seemed of a pitchy darkness until
the eye recovered itself in the preceding flash. The storm, as is often the case in Switzerland,
appeared at once in various parts of the heavens. The most violent storm hung exactly north of the
town, over the part of the lake which lies between the promontory of Belle Rive and the village of
Coppet. Another storm enlightened Jure with faint flashes, and another darkened and sometimes
disclosed the mole, a peak mountain to the east of the lake. While I watched the tempests, so
beautiful that terrific, I wandered on with a hasty step. This noble war in the sky elevated
my spirits. I clasped my hands and exclaimed aloud, William, dear angel, this is thy funeral,
this is thy dirge. As I said these words, I perceived in the gloom a figure which stole from
behind a clump of trees near me. I stood fixed, gazing intently. I could not be mistaken. A flash
of lightning illuminated the object and discovered its shape plainly to me, its gigantic stature,
and the deformity of its aspect more hideous than belongs to humanity. Instantly informed
me that it was the wretch, the filthy demon to whom I had given life. What did he there? Could
he be, I shuddered the conception, the murderer of my brother? No sooner did that idea cross my
imagination than I became convinced of its truth. My teeth chattered, and I was forced to lean
against a tree for support. The figure passed me quickly, and I lost it in the gloom. Nothing
in human shape could have destroyed the fair child. He was the murderer, I could not doubt it. The
mere presence of the idea was an irresistible proof of the fact. I thought of pursuing the devil,
but it would have been in vain, for another flash discovered him to me, hanging among the rocks of
the nearly perpendicular ascent of Mount Salève, a hill that bounds Plain-Palais on the south. He
soon reached the summit and disappeared. I remained motionless. The thunder ceased,
but the rain still continued, and the scene was enveloped in an impenetrable darkness. I
revolved in my mind the events which I had until now sought to forget. The whole train of my
progress towards the creation, the appearance of the works of my own hands at my bedside,
its departure. Two years had now nearly elapsed since the night on which he first received life,
and was this his first crime? Alas, I had turned loose into the world a depraved wretch,
whose delight was in carnage and misery. Had he not murdered my brother?
No one can conceive the anguish I suffered during the remainder of the night,
which I spent, cold and wet, in the open air. But I did not feel the inconvenience of the weather.
My imagination was busy in scenes of evil and despair. I considered the being whom I had cast
among mankind, and endowed with the will and power to effect purposes of horror such as the
deity which he had now done, nearly in the light of my own vampire, my own spirit let loose from
my grave, and forced to destroy all that was dear to me. Day dawned, and I directed my steps
towards the town. The gates were open, and I hastened to my father's house. My first thought
was to discover what I knew of the murderer, and cause instant pursuit to be made. But I paused
when I reflected on the story that I had to tell. A being whom I myself had formed and endued with
life had met me at midnight among the precipices of an inaccessible mountain. I remembered also the
nervous fever with which I had been seized just at that time that I had dated my creation, and which
would give an air of delirium to a tale otherwise so utterly improbable. I well knew that if any
other had communicated such a revelation to me, I would have looked upon it as the ravings of an
insanity. Besides, the strange nature of the animal would elude all pursuit, even if I were
so far credited as to persuade my relatives to commence it, and then of what use would be pursuit,
who could arrest a creature capable of scaling the overhanging sides of Mont-Saleve. These
reflections determined me, and I resolved to remain silent. It was about five in the morning
when I entered my father's house. I told the servants not to disturb the family, and went into
the library to attend their usual hour of rising. Six years had elapsed, passed in a dream but for
one indelible trace, and I stood in the same place where I had last embraced my father before my
departure for Ingolstadt. Beloved and venerable parent, he still remained to me. I gazed on the
picture of my mother, which stood over the mantelpiece. It was an historical subject,
painted at my father's desire, and represented Caroline Beaufort in an agony of despair, kneeling
by the coffin of her dead father. Her garb was rustic, and her cheek pale, but there was an air
of dignity and beauty that hardly permitted the sentiment of pity. Below this picture was a
miniature of William, and my tears flowed when I looked upon it. While I was thus engaged,
Ernest entered. He had heard me arrive, and hastened to welcome me.
Welcome, my dearest Victor, said he. Ah, I wish you had come three months ago, and then you would
have found us all joyous and delighted. You come to us now to share a misery which nothing can
alleviate, yet your presence will, I hope, revive our father, who seems sinking under his misfortune,
and your persuasions will induce poor Elizabeth to cease her vain and tormenting self-accusations.
Poor William, he was our darling and our pride.
Tears, unrestrained, fell from my brother's eyes. A sense of mortal agony crept over my frame.
Before, I had only imagined the wretchedness of my desolated home. The reality came on me as a new
and not less terrible disaster. I tried to calm Ernest. I inquired more minutely concerning my
father, and her I named my cousin. She, most of all, said Ernest, requires consolation. She accused
herself of having caused the death of my brother, and that made her very wretched. But since the
murderer has been discovered... The murderer discovered? Good God, how can that be? Who could
attempt to pursue him? It is impossible. One might as well try to overtake the winds or combine a
I saw him too. He was free last night.
I do not know what you mean, replied my brother, in accents of wonder. But to us, the discovery we
have made completes our misery. No one would believe it at first, and even now Elizabeth will
not be convinced, notwithstanding all the evidence. Indeed, who would credit that Justine Moritz,
who was so amiable and fond of all the family, could suddenly become so capable of so frightful,
and so appalling a crime? Justine Moritz? Poor, poor girl, is she the accused? But it is wrongfully.
Everyone knows that. No one believes it, surely, Ernest? No one did at first, but several
circumstances came out that have almost forced conviction upon us, and her own behaviour has
been so confused as to add to the evidence of facts a weight that, I fear, leaves no hope for
doubt. But she will be tried today, and you will then hear all.
He then related that, the morning on which the murderer of poor William had been discovered,
Justine had been taken ill, and confined to her bed for several days. During this interval,
one of the servants, happening to examine the apparel she had worn on the night of the murder,
had discovered in her pocket the picture of my mother, which had been judged to be the
temptation of the murderer. The servant instantly showed it to one of the others,
who, without saying a word to any of the family, went to a magistrate, and upon their deposition,
Justine was apprehended, on being charged with the fact the poor girl confirmed the suspicion,
in a great measure, by her extreme confusion of manner. This was a strange tale, but it did not
shake my faith, and I replied earnestly, You are all mistaken. I know the murderer. Justine, poor,
Justine, is innocent. At that instant, my father entered. I saw unhappiness deeply impressed on
his countenance, but he endeavoured to welcome me cheerfully, and, after we had exchanged our
mournful greeting, would have introduced some other topic than that of our disaster, had not
earnest exclaimed, Good God, Papa! Victor says that he knows who was the murderer of our poor
William. We do also, unfortunately, replied my father, for indeed I had rather have been
forever ignorant than have discovered so much depravity and ungratitude in one I valued so
highly. My dear father, you are mistaken. Justine is innocent. If she is, God forbid that she should
suffer as guilty. She is to be tried today, and I hope, I sincerely hope, that she will be acquitted.
This speech calmed me. I was firmly convinced in my own mind that Justine, and indeed every human
being, was guiltless of this murder. I had no fear, therefore, that any circumstantial evidence
could be brought forward strong enough to convict her. My tale was not one to announce publicly.
A astounding horror would be looked upon as madness by the vulgar. Did anyone indeed exist,
except I, the creator, who would believe, unless his senses convinced him, in the existence of the
living monument of presumption and rash ignorance which I had left loose upon the world? We were
soon joined by Elizabeth. Time had altered her since I last beheld her. It had endowed her with
loveliness, surpassing the beauty of her childish years. There was the same candour, the same vivacity,
but it was a lie to an expression more full of sensibility and intellect. She welcomed me with
Your arrival, my dear cousin, said she, fills me with hope. You perhaps will find some means to
justify my poor guiltless Justine. Alas, who is safe if she can be convicted of crime? I rely on
her innocence as certainly as I do upon my own. Our misfortune is doubly hard to us. We have not
only lost that lovely darling boy, but this poor girl whom I sincerely love is to be torn away by
even a worth fate. If she is condemned, I never shall know joy more. But she will not, I am sure
she will not, and then I shall be happy again, even after the sad death of my little William.
She is innocent, my Elizabeth, said I, and that shall be proved. Fear nothing, but let your spirits
be cheered by the assurance of her acquittal. How kind and generous you are! Everyone else believes
in her guilt, and that made me wretched, for I knew it was impossible, and to see everyone else
prejudiced in so deadly a manner rendered me hopeless and despairing. She wept. Dearest niece,
said my father, dry your tears. If she is, as you believe, innocent, rely on the justice of our laws
and the activity with which I shall prevent the slightest shadow of partiality. End of chapter 7,
recorded by Alex Foster, 15th of September, 2005, www.alexfoster.me.uk